Okay, so in the previous lecture
we have seen that how we can
work with the file system.
And I know that there was one
unsolved puzzle that was piuz.
What is this synchronous version?
Right, so this particular video
is going to be super duper important
in order to understand
the node js internal working.
Okay, so what I'm going to do is
I'm going to create a file that
is, let's say script js file.
So this is where I am going to code.
Now let's import the FS module first.
So, so that is pretty simple.
You know the stuff that is
node and then colon fs.
Right?
So we have the FS module.
Now what we can do is.
Now see, let's say I have
a very simple task.
So my task is that, sorry, task.
My task is just read the contents
of notes Txt file, right?
So what you will do first, you will
do it in a synchronous manner.
So let's say I'll
just say console log that this
is the start of script.
Okay, Start of script.
Okay, Then what you will say,
you will say, hey, const.
I get the contents.
So how can you get the contents?
You will just say fs.read file sync
and just pass in the path
that is notes, dot TXT and let's
read it as a UTF8 encoding.
And then you will say, hey,
console, log, the contents.
Okay, let's try to console
log the contents
of this particular thing.
And, and, and finally let's just
do a console log, saying that
this is the end of script.
So this is the code.
Like this is a very cool
code that you have written.
So now if I run this particular
code, can you guys guess
the output for this code?
Pretty simple, right?
First you will get this console
log, then you will get
the contents, and then you will
get the end of script.
Now if I say node script and enter.
So yeah, indeed, you
got this art of script.
You got the contents
of the file and end of the script.
So this code actually worked
in a manner that we liked.
Now understand one thing.
Whenever you call the synchronous
operation, these
synchronous operations are actually
known as blocking operations.
Okay, These are known as,
blocking operations.
What do I mean by that
blocking operation?
Guys, tell me one thing.
What do you think?
How much easy is it
to read this file?
How much time it can take to this
particular line of code to execute?
You will say that piu.
This depends upon the file.
For example, you are trying
to Read this file, right?
You are trying to read
a file that is this one.
Now if this file is one mb, it will
take, it will be very quick, right?
Because one MB is very less.
It can be, but, but it
can be a 1gb file.
It can be a 1terabyte of file.
It can be a 1petabytes
of file, right?
So if this file is, let's say, one
GB and it has a lot of content,
can I say that this whole
operation, this whole line is
going to take, let's say, maybe,
maybe one minute, depending upon,
of course, your machine
configuration and all that.
So let's say to read one GB
of file, this code takes one minute.
That means when your code
is executing line by line,
you execute this line.
Then you block the operation
for one minute, right?
This, this particular line docks
everything for one minute.
So till one minute, if something is
going on in the background which
is trying to read the file, once
you have read this one GB of file,
then all the code will execute
here.
So let's say here you
have 100, line of code.
More so this, all 100 line
of code will execute
once this has been completed.
So that means if you see
the execution of the code, this
blocked everything right here was
a blocking thing, which is not good.
Okay?
You should not use
blocking operations.
I mean, it depends when
to use and when not to use.
But in most of the cases you
will not use the blocking operations
because let's say you are
building a web server, okay?
So let's say, let's.
Let me give you a real world example.
So if you are building a web server
and you have users, right?
If you, if this is your server
and this server is written in node,
I mean not written in node.
I mean it is, running node js.
So let's say the users
are coming, okay?
So this is your first user, this
is your second user, third
user, fourth user, and five user.
So users are coming.
Now let's say he requested that, Hey,
I want the contents of some file.
Now that file lives
on the server, and that particular
file is one GB in size.
Now you have to wait for one minute.
Your server is now blocked
and reading that file,
which is going to take one minute.
So for next one minute, all these
users cannot use your server.
You get it, right?
Because you have made your
server busy to read that file.
And all these extra users are, are
now going to face a downtime, okay?
They will say, hey,
the server is not working.
You remember that when you were
in college or when you were in
school you used to check your
result and when there is a lot
of rush, server didn't respond,
it is going to take a lot of
time.
So because of this one user, because
you have written your code in a
synchronous way or in a blocking
way, due to this blocking nature,
you have made your server work a
lot, right?
Your server is continuously working
to read that file.
But in the, on the other hand,
no other request is served.
So this is your blocking operation.
So this is what you're doing here.
Now alternative to the blocking
operation is
an asynchronous operation, also
known as non blocking.
Okay, so let me show
you how that works.
So on the other hand you have
asynchronous, so you can
do it asynchronously or
also known as non blocking.
So in non blocking fashion,
what you can do is you
can just say fs.read file.
Okay, now this is an asynchronous.
Now what you will notice is that
first parameters remain same,
second parameter remain same.
Only difference is that now you have
to pass a callback function, right?
Because this particular operation
runs in background, right?
Runs somewhere else.
How will it tell you that?
Hey, I am.
I have completed reading the file
and how will it give you the data?
So for that it requires
a callback function.
In this callback function, the first
parameter is the error if there
is any, and second is the data.
So you can actually keep
a check that, hey, if it has got
error, you can just do
a console dot log of the error.
So whatsoever is the error.
Else you can just console log
the contents of the file.
So you can just say console.log
contents got.
And you can just say, hey,
these are the contents.
So now what you have done is you
have converted this piece of code.
Okay, you can just pause
the screen right here.
This particular piece of code
and this piece of code are
actually doing the same thing.
The only difference is this is non
blocking and this is blocking.
So now if I remove this code.
So now what you have is you have this
console log start, you are doing
some asynchronous operation and end.
Now interestingly, if I run
this code, and we got the error
because this is not content,
actually this is data.
Okay, so yeah, my bad.
So if I run this particular code
again, start of script, end of
script and then you got the content,
do you see what happened?
That this particular line, this
particular statement was not
able to block the execution.
See, we got start first,
that is on the top.
Then we got end of the script.
See end of the script.
Meanwhile this thing was reading
the file in the background.
And once it has completed reading
the file, once it got the content
contents, it executed a function
that I have passed as a callback
function which is at the end.
So if Even you have 100 line
of code that will continue to work
while it is reading the file.
So this is how the asynchronous
or non blocking operation works.
So whenever you do a heavy
task, for example cfs.everything
has a synchronous
and a non synchronous way.
For example append file, this
is what this is
asynchronously appending the data.
But on the synchronous
this is a blocking call.
Similarly CHMOD is an asynchronous CH
mod sync is a blocking operation.
So every operation has an equivalent
blocking and non blocking code.
So the code is absolutely same.
The only difference is that
the read file is asynchronous,
whereas the synchronous version
is a blocking operation.
And it doesn't take any
callback, it gives you the content
as a return statement.
But here you have to pass a
callback function, which makes
sense right now at this
particular point of time I can
even go a too much deep into
the architecture of node js,
how node js works.
But let's keep that
for the next video.
I will try to explain that how
internally JavaScript or
I can, I should say the Node js
handles all these requests.
So let's talk about that
thing in the next video.
So yeah, super excited
for the next video.
Let's meet you in the next one.
Until then, bye bye and take care.